# IrisSpeciesPredictor
- Contributors: Gaurang Ahuja, Wai Yan Lee, Uyen Nguyen Nguyen, Tiffany Chu

## About
The aim of this project is to explore the [Iris dataset](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/53/iris) and determine whether certain features are useful to classify iris species. We hope to answer "Can we predict the Iris species using petal and sepal measurements?". By leveraging data analysis and machine learning techniques, we seek to accurately predict the species of iris flowers from given measurements.

Initial analysis revealed that petal length and width, especially for Setosa, are strong predictors as they clearly distinguish species, while Sepal features show less separation. We applied the DecisionTree and KNN classifiers mdoels to evaluate how well the Iris dataset's features predict the species. Our analysis shows that petal measurements are the strongest predictors, specifically petal length vs petal width. 
Both models achieve high accuracy (~93% from the Decision Tree and ~95% from the KNN classifier) with cross-validation confirming the strong performance. Some classification errors occurred between Versicolor and Virginica due to their overlapping characteristics. In conculsion, our analysis provides evidence from both exploratory analysis and machine learning models that petal and sepal measurements do allow accurate classification, validate model performance, and highlight the biological meaning behind feature separability. Moreover, Iris species can be predicted accurately from petal and sepal measurements, with petal features providing the strongest predictive power. 
However, there are some limitations associated with our study. Some key limitations of the dataset and the related findings include: the dataset contains only 150 samples with 4 numeric features and 3 species classes, which is considered quite small and simple compared to data on other plant species. This limits the complexity of patterns that can be learned and makes it less applicable to more complex classification tasks. Its size also prevents it from being useful for complex machine learning techniques like deep learning, which require larger datasets.

## Report
The final report can be found [here](https://tiffchu.github.io/group28/).


## Dependencies
- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) 
- [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)
- [VS Code Jupyter Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-toolsai.jupyter)

### Usage

#### Setup
> If you are using Windows or Mac, make sure Docker Desktop is running.

1. Clone this GitHub repository.
    - `git clone git@github.com:tiffchu/group28.git`
    - `cd` into the cloned repository

2. Build the Docker image
    - `docker-compose build`

This creates the `dockerlock` image with all required packages installed.


#### Running the analysis

1. Navigate to the root of this project `group28` on your computer using the command line and enter the following command:
```
docker compose up
```

2. In the terminal, copy the URL that starts with `http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab` and paste the URL into your browser.

3. Open a new terminal and navigate to the root of this project `group28` on your computer. Enter the following command to reset the project to a clean state and remove all the files generated by previous runs of the analysis.
```
make clean
```

4. To run the analysis in its entirety, enter the following command in the terminal in the project root:
```
make all
```

Navigate to `reports` to view the generated report file called `iris_predictor_report.html`

#### Clean up

1. To shut down the container and clean up the resources, 
type `Ctrl` + `C` in the terminal where you launched the container, and then type `docker compose rm`


## Developer notes
### Developer dependencies
- `conda` (version 23.9.0 or higher)
- `conda-lock` (version 2.5.7 or higher)

### Adding a new dependency
1. Please look at the `environment.yml` file for a list of dependencies required to run this project. You can also refer to the `conda-lock.yml` file.
Sample command: `conda env create --name <my-env-name> --file <path/to/environment.yml>`
2. Run `conda-lock -k explicit --file environment.yml -p linux-64` to update the `conda-linux-64.lock` file.
3. Re-build the Docker image locally to ensure it builds and runs properly.
4. Push the changes to GitHub. A new Docker image will be built and pushed to Docker Hub automatically. It will be tagged with the SHA for the commit that changed the file.
5. Update the `docker-compose.yml` file on your branch to use the new container image (make sure to update the tag specifically).
6. Send a pull request to merge the changes into the `main` branch.

## Licenses
This project is distributed under the licenses listed in `LICENSE`:

This project utilizes the Iris Dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. The dataset is provided by the original authors and UCI; please refer to the dataset’s page on the UCI Machine Learning Repository for the official licensing and citation instructions. Citations are located in the `iris_predictor_report.ipynb` file. Use of the Iris data in this project is intended to comply with those terms by providing appropriate credit to the dataset creators and to UCI.

The project report and documentation contained in this repository are licensed under the Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) License. This means you are free to share and adapt the report for non‑commercial purposes, as long as you provide attribution, indicate if changes were made, and distribute any derivatives under the same license.